= Encyclopedia of Life - Vagrant Build Project

=== www.eol.org

== INTRODUCTION

Welcome to the Encyclopedia of Life Vagrant Build project.  This project 
contains the information needed to create a Vagrant box for EOL development 
from a generic 64-bit Ubuntu Vagrant box.  This repo should be checked out on 
the host operating system for the VirtualBox VM that will contain the EOL code.

If you want to simply use the current Vagrant box for EOL Environment, please
go to https://github.com/EOL/eol-vagrant.

For this project we assume you are familiar with a UNIX 'bash' style command
line.

You will be switching between the local host command line and the Vagrant 
machine command line a bit.  Any section that needs to be on the Vagrant 
machine will start with:

  # Vagrant

Sections that start on the local host will start with:

  # Local Host

If you are working through this in order, it will not be necessary to exit 
and connect to vagrant each time, but there is at least one spot where that 
is necessary.  To get from the vagrant host to the local host give the command:

  % exit

== LICENSE

The full code base is released under the MIT License.  Details are available 
in the "LICENSE" file at the root of the code folder.

Things you need to do:

1. Install VirtualBox
2. Install Vagrant
3. Install Git
4. Git the Vagrant box for EOL build environment
5. Run 'vagrant up'
6. Update the box
7. Install git on the box
8. Get rvm
9. Get the EOL code base
10. Install the required version of Ruby
11. Add some more important packages
12. Create database.yml
13. Get your EOL gems
14. Build and configure virtuoso
15. Setup the EOL databases
16. Install PHP 5.3
17. Tweak Your Local Environment
18. Dump the box (if desired)
19. Configure for tests (if desired)
20. Personalizing Git

==== Install VirtualBox

Go to https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads and download the appropriate 
version of VirtualBox for your operating system. Follow the installation 
instructions, but don't worry about actually running the application.

==== Install Vagrant

Go to http://www.vagrantup.com/downloads.html and download the appropriate 
version of Vagrant. Follow the installation instructions.

==== Install Git

Get a reasonably recent version of the command line version of Git. This may 
already be installed on your machine or you may need to go somewhere like 
http://github.com and follow their instructions to get it installed.

==== Git the Vagrantfile box for EOL build environment

  # Local Host
  % git clone https://github.com/EOL/eol-build-vagrant.git

is the easiest approach. However, you may want to setup SSH access to GitHub 
as described here: help.github.com/articles/generating-ssh-keys and clone it
using the SSH version.

==== Run 'vagrant up'

  # Local Host
  % cd eol-build-vagrant
  % vagrant up

This should create a vanilla 62-bit Ubuntu Vagrant VM on your local host.
Once it completes you should be able to access it with:

  % vagrant ssh

You may want to go into the VirtualBox application at this point and just 
verify that the VM has 2G of memory.

==== Update the box

This will bring the operating system on the generic box up to date in terms 
of security patches etc.

  # Local Host
  % vagrant ssh
  % sudo apt-get -y update

==== Install git on the box

Now you have to install and reconfigure git on the VM:

  # Vagrant
  % sudo apt-get -y install git

==== Get rvm

  # Vagrant
  % sudo apt-get -y install curl
  % curl -L https://get.rvm.io | bash -s stable
  % exit

Note that you should exit any shells you have on the VM so that they can correctly pickup the rvm shell functions.

==== Get the EOL code base

  # Local Host
  % vagrant ssh
  % ROOT=~/git
  % mkdir -p $ROOT; cd $ROOT
  % git clone https://github.com/EOL/eol.git

==== Install the required version of Ruby

  # Vagrant
  % RUBY_VERSION=`cat $ROOT/eol/.ruby-version`
  % rvm install $RUBY_VERSION

==== Add some more important packages

  # Vagrant
  % sudo apt-get -y install build-essential default-jre memcached flex gperf \
    libqt4-dev libxslt-dev libxml2-dev redis-server mysql-server mysql-client \
    libmysqlclient-dev redis-server vim emacs23 php5 imagemagick

The installation of the MySQL packages will ask for a password multiple times.
Do not provide a password.

==== Create database.yml

  % cp $ROOT/eol/config/database.sample.yml $ROOT/eol/config/database.yml

Note that by default no password is set for EOL development databases. Feel
free to set a password (we recommend using 'mysql_secure_installation') and be 
sure to update the database.yml.

==== Get your EOL gems

  # Vagrant
  % cd $ROOT/eol
  % bundle install

==== Build and configure virtuoso

This outlines how to build version 7.1.0 of Virtuoso from the master branch of 
the Virtuoso GitHub repository.

We have found that Virtuoso can be very particular about the version 
number that is compatible with the related Ruby gems. As of July 10, 2014
Vagrant 7.1.0 works well (7.1.1, however, does not):

  # Vagrant
  % cd /tmp; CFLAGS="-O2 -m64"; export CFLAGS; \
  wget https://github.com/openlink/virtuoso-opensource/archive/v7.1.0.tar.gz
  % tar xzf v7.1.0.tar.gz
  % cd virtuoso-opensource-7.1.0; ./autogen.sh --enable-maintainer-mode \
  --prefix=/usr/local/ --with-readline --program-transform-name="s/isql/isql-vt/"
  % ./configure --prefix=/usr/local/ --with-readline \
  --program-transform-name="s/isql/isql-vt/"; make; sudo make install

The above line may hang.  If this happens try typing <cntrl>-D to see if the
build process resumes.

  % git clone https://github.com/mbl-cli/virtuoso-cookbook.git \
  /tmp/virtuoso-cookbook; cd /tmp/virtuoso-cookbook
  % sudo cp templates/default/init.erb /etc/init.d/virtuoso; \
  sudo chmod 0755 /etc/init.d/virtuoso; \
  sudo update-rc.d virtuoso defaults; \
  sudo service virtuoso start

Note: Renaming the isql-vt executable is necessary to avoid a potential 
conflict with isql from the PHP 5.3 package.

Note: Need to figure out how to get this to kick off correctly when the box 
restarts. The init.d/virtuoso file seems to have some issues.

Finally adjust some of the permissions using the Virtuoso isql interface:

  # Vagrant
  % isql-vt 1111 dba dba

This will start an interactive command-line session with Virtuoso.  In this 
environment give the following commands:

  GRANT EXECUTE ON SPARUL_CLEAR TO "SPARQL";
  GRANT EXECUTE ON DB.DBA.SPARUL_DROP TO "SPARQL";
  GRANT DELETE ON DB.DBA.RDF_QUAD TO "SPARQL";
  GRANT EXECUTE ON DB.DBA.SPARQL_INSERT_DICT_CONTENT TO "SPARQL";
  GRANT EXECUTE ON DB.DBA.SPARQL_DELETE_DICT_CONTENT TO "SPARQL";
  quit;
  
==== Setup the EOL databases

  # Vagrant
  % cd $ROOT/eol
  % rake db:create:all
  % rake solr:start
  % rake eol:reset

==== Get EOL PHP Code

  # Vagrant
  % cd $ROOT; git clone https://github.com/EOL/eol_php_code.git
  % sudo ln -s $ROOT/eol_php_code /var/www

You should now be able to go to:

  http://localhost:8080/eol_php_code/README.rdoc

=== Tweak Your Local Environment

  # Vagrant
  % cd $ROOT/eol_php_code; \
  chmod -R a+w log temp tmp applications/content_server/; \
  cp $ROOT/eol/config/database.yml config; \
  cp config/environments/local.rb.sample config/environments/local.rb
  % cp $ROOT/eol/config/environments/local.rb.sample \
  $ROOT/eol/config/environments/local.rb
  % bundle install
  % sudo apt-get -y install  libapache2-mod-php5 libarc-php libfpdf-tpl-php \
  libphp-phpmailer libzend-framework-php libzend-framework-zendx-php \
  php-auth-sasl php-fpdf php-http php-http-request php-http-upload \
  php-http-webdav-server php-image-text php-imlib php-log php-mail \
  php-mail-mime php-mail-mimedecode php-mime-type php-net-dime php-net-ftp \
  php-net-smtp php-net-socket php-net-url php-pear php-soap php-xml-htmlsax3 \
  php-xml-parser php5-curl php5-dev php5-gd php5-imagick php5-memcache \
  php5-memcached php5-mysqlnd php5-ps php5-uuid php5-xmlrpc php5-xsl phpsysinfo
  % sudo apachectl graceful

==== Dump the box (if desired)

This is a good point to check point the box and is the point where we created
the Vagrant box for EOL.

  # Local
  % vagrant package --output eol-dev

==== Configure for tests (if desired)

Currently you may need to make sure Solr is running with:

  # Vagrant
  % cd ~/git/eol
  % rake solr:start

You should now be able to run the Rails tests with:

  # Vagrant
  % cd ~/git/eol
  % rake
  
and the PHP tests with:

  # Vagrant
  % cd ~/git/eol_php_code
  % php tests/run_tests.php

In most cases all of the tests should pass. There are some subtle order 
dependencies that we have not fully worked out that can cause failures. It is 
always worth running the tests a second time if there are failures to see if 
they just go away.

== Personalizing Git

If you plan on contributing changes to EOL you will need an account on GitHub 
if you don't already have one.  You will then probably want to configure git 
to make it more convenient:

First you should set up a SSH key with:

  # Vagrant
  % ssh-keygen -t rsa -C "Your Email Address"

Use the default filename and don't set a passphrase. Then copy the resulting 
~/.ssh/id_rsa.pub into your SSH keys on GitHub. Note that the ssh-add command 
mentioned in the GitHub docs is not necessary and won't work without install 
additional packages.

Then you'll want to run the following:

  # Vagrant
  % git config --global user.name "Your Full Name"
  % git config --global user.email "Your Email Address"
